Two months ago, UK Prime Minister Kier Starmer
signed an agreement that will transfer the
sovereignty of the British Indian Ocean Territory
to the independent nation of Maitius. This place
is honestly barely worth mentioning. It has zero
inhabitants apart from temporary naval personnel
and its total land area is only 21 square miles at
low tide. However, the steel once it is finished
in the courts will have one big symbolic side
effect. Losing this dot on the map at 71 degrees
east will mean that for about 120 days next
year the sun will set on the British Empire. Now
for a lot of people back in the UK itself this
symbolic decline is not exactly surprising. 20
years ago it was one of the fastest growing major
economies in the world. But today it's completely
paralyzed because of some all too familiar
problems. The collapse of a trading empire,
over financialization, single city centralization,
housing unaffordability, wealth concentration,
reckless privatization, corporate consolidation,
brain drain, a perceived overdependence on the
wealthy, a public private sector revolving door
resulting in limpisted regulation, a debt crisis,
and reactionary policy, all fueled by the
ideas that just don't work anymore. These
problems are clearly not unique to the UK. But
they saw what everybody else was doing and said,
"Hold my warm beer and baked beans. We can do it
better. The UK is now the best place to invest,
creating 384,000 jobs. In this current job market,
it is tough to get a job. Told the British people
she wouldn't change the debt target. While
debt's going up and spending's going up,
you think a big influx of millionaires to London
would push up property prices even further. What
is happening now? Terrible economic mismanagement.
One of the common issues in the UK is that there
are actually a few things that are working
really well, which sounds like a good thing,
right? The problem is to keep the few things that
are working going, other major sacrifices need to
be made, which leaves most people worse off. The
city of London and the surrounding metropolitan
areas are still doing very well, as long as you
don't look too closely. Its GDP per capita is
some of the highest anywhere in the world, and the
only countries that beat it have far fewer people
and normally a generous helping of oil or tax
loopholes. London has roughly the same population
and the same GDP as all of Switzerland. And
when counted separately from the rest of the UK,
it's actually growing faster than the Swiss,
too. This is mainly because London is the second
largest financial center in the world, only
slightly behind New York. Now, you might think
that this doesn't really make much sense. New York
has the New York Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ,
which are almost as large as every other
exchange in the world combined. And obviously,
they dwarf the London Stock Exchange. New York
is also home to the two largest non-government
banks in the world, and it has more than twice the
population. But London punches above its weight,
offering financial services that are really quite
symbolic of the country's broader issues. Which
is why to understand the current problems in the
UK, you need to understand the basics of London's
financial system. The finance industry in London
isn't really concerned with trading companies.
To do that, they would need successful companies
in the first place. In fact, a lot of the largest
British companies to go public in recent years
have done it in America instead since the London
Stock Exchange was too small to bother with. So,
where New York has built its financial center
around financing the world's most valuable
companies, London instead does most of its
work providing financial services to the world's
richest people. New York may be where institutions
go if they need to make a lot of money. But London
is where they go if they already have it. Now,
some of this is by coincidence. London is
conveniently located between America and Asia,
which when combined with the pound's historic
dominance has made it a convenient time zone
to use as a foreign exchange hub. According to
the Bank for International Settlements, about
40% of global foreign exchange volume goes through
London, which is more than double the runner up.
London also dominates in wealth management, which
is just finance bros speak for shuffling rich
people's money around to achieve certain goals
and charging a fee on it in the process. Now,
they are obviously pretty damn good at
this because financial services are now
the country's number one export. They bring in
more money by consulting on how to move money
around than they do by selling cars, machinery,
oil, and precious metals combined. In 2023,
the UK brought in the equivalent of $ 160 billion
in revenue just from these services, according to
the City of London's own data. So, what the [__]
are these people actually doing? Well, you might
think that the goals that wealthy international
clientele have with their money is just to turn
it into more money, right? But that's actually
only a small part of the story. A Robin Hood
account could handle that part. The real money is
made in alternative investments, tax structuring,
legal structuring, and providing a nice safe place
to park cash, ill gotten or otherwise. London has
been an incredibly popular place for some of the
richest people in the world to base themselves
because it really is a one-stop shop for anything
they and their money would ever need. World class
law firms to make sure that the family trust
is set up properly. Ultra luxury real estate to
park a few hundred million. International tax
experts to structure holding companies in all
the wrong places. London really does it all.
And this is one other thing that makes London
really popular. A 2017 study by the University of
Amsterdam tracked the transfer of money into low
tax and low regulation jurisdiction to find out
where it was all ending up. Now, they did a whole
lot of nerdy math in detailed forensic accounting,
but I want to play a little game. I want to see if
you can recognize a pattern in this research.
Some of the top destinations for this money
was the British Virgin Islands, Bermuda, the
Cayman Islands, and the Marshall Islands. Now,
since I can already hear Patrick Bole furiously
typing in my comment section, yes, most of the
business done in London is above board, but
even these legitimate operations have become
dependent on a foundation of questionable cash.
For example, Lloyds of London is a little bit
like a stock exchange, but for insuring things.
It's a market where underwriters and brokers come
together to create contracts for complex, unusual,
or high-risk things like ships, satellites, and
basically anything that you couldn't go to Geico
for. One of the reasons this industry has remained
so dominant in London is because insurance takes
a deep pool of capital and amicable regulations.
Sometimes insurance brokers will want to write a
policy for an oil tanker that may or may not be
abiding by US State Department sanctions. That's
obviously not going to fly in New York, but London
has always been a little bit more accommodating.
The old team at Micro did a great video recently
on exactly how shady that whole industry can be.
And the point here is that the shadyiest part of
a shady industry is conducted in London. Now, I
know it's not exactly breaking news that London's
financial system has been used for some unsavory
purposes, and that's not the point of this video.
The problem is now that London has become the only
reliably growing component of the UK's economy,
which means that the government has routinely
and consistently made sacrifices to keep it
turnurning, often by neglecting the rest of the
country. This has obviously been bad for regular
people who have been left behind by the games of
the global financial system. It's been bad for
traditional industries in the country. And in a
cruel twist of irony, it hasn't even been good for
the city itself. The millionaires and billionaires
that London pandered so hard to accommodate are
now leaving in record numbers. So, it's time to
learn how money works to find out how the UK let
it get this bad. This week's video is sponsored
by Bootdev, a platform I've actually been using
myself to brush up on my backend skills. Bootdev
is learning to solve one of the biggest issues
with learning to code online. Boredom. They've
built a platform that feels more like a game than
a course using smart design to keep you engaged
while you're building real coding skills that
actually matter in a job setting. It's all focused
on back-end web development. So, you'll be writing
a ton of code from day one in languages like
Python, Go, and TypeScript. The lessons balance
theory and practice. And unlike a lot of tutorials
that just explain concepts, Bootdev makes sure
you're constantly applying what you learn by
working through real projects. I've been going
through their data structures and algorithms in
Python course, and I genuinely think it's one of
the best structured coding courses I've ever used.
You earn XP, level up, unlock spells in your spell
book, and yes, there's even an AI wizard bearer
named Boots who guides you when you're stuck.
He doesn't just give you the answer. He asks
the right questions to help you figure it out,
which honestly helps stuff click faster for me.
Also worth noting, the content is free to browse
in guest mode, so you can explore the courses
before paying. If you don't want access to the
interactive parts, like hands-on coding, progress
tracking, and AI help, there's a paid membership.
But they offer a full 30-day refund policy, no
questions asked if it's not for you. So, if you're
serious about learning back-end development and
want to actually enjoy the process, go check out
boot.dev. You can try courses for free. And if
you decide to go allin, use my code moneyworks
to get 25% off your first year on the annual plan.
That's money works and the link is right below the
video. The UK has made major sacrifices to make
themselves attractive to global billionaires.
They have deregulated financial systems,
been led on investigation and enforcement,
and allowed for widespread investments into things
like housing, which have pushed out regular Brits.
This all happened in less obvious ways, too.
The UK's currency, the pound, is the most
financialized currency in the world, which is just
a finance bro way of saying that it gets used for
selling financial transactions more than it gets
used for, well, you know, boring stuff like buying
goods and services. The great British pound is the
fourth most traded currency after the US dollar,
the euro, and the yen. But both America and
Europe have a much larger overall economy,
and trade volumes balance out the speculation.
Japan is also still a much larger economy than
the UK. But the currency is also used to pull a
lot of financial [__] like the yen carry trade
where investors will borrow money at low interest
rates in Japan, exchange those yen for something
like American dollars and then use the money to
invest in global markets, hopefully profiting off
the difference between high market returns and
low interest rates. Now, you may not believe it,
but there are real consequences to turning your
currency into poker chips to play in the casino of
global markets. It means that the pound is highly
susceptible to big swings in value over relatively
minor changes in the real economy. What this does
is makes it harder for real export businesses like
Rolls-Royce jet engines to make deals without
paying a premium to hedge against currency
fluctuations between when they make a deal and
when it actually gets paid for. But at least all
these sacrifices have made them a hub for global
billionaires, right? Well, just late last week,
one of UK's richest residents, John Frederickson,
announced that he would be leaving the country and
moving to somewhere that was more accommodating
to him and his business interests. In a quote,
he said that the country had gone to hell,
just like his native home, Norway. Now,
according to the human development report,
Norway has the second highest living standard
of any country on Earth. So, this does seem a
bit confusing. Some have speculated that what
he actually meant by gone to hell like Norway
was that they would dare to levy taxes on him
like Norway. The coverage of Mr. Frederickson's
great sea change has mostly been focused on the
dozens of service staff that will no longer have
a job tending to him and his residents in the UK.
It's also been focused on what could be the most
expensive home sale in the country's history as
he moves out of his Chelsea estate called, and I
promise I didn't make this up, the old rectory.
I'm sorry, Fry, but astronomers renamed Uranus in
2620 to end that stupid joke once and for all. Oh,
what's it called now? Urectum. Anyway, this is
not an isolated incident. Frederickson is joining
a wave of high- netw worth individuals moving
out of the UK. In fact, according to a report
by Henley and Partners, an international law firm
that specializes in dealing with wealthy families,
the UK is now losing more wealthy people than
China, even though they have 13 times as many
people overall. The number one reason for this
great exodus is that a lot of these people were
not actually from the UK to begin with. They
moved there because they were attracted to the
services it provided without asking for much
in return. But now that the country is trying
to get a little bit more serious about raising
tax revenues from these same people, they are
once again shopping around for a new place to call
home. Overwhelmingly, these people are moving to
the UAE thanks to a combination of its low taxes
and the same focus on international services.
There was an old saying that if someone will
cheat with you, they will cheat on you. Now, this
isn't how relationships work, but the same idea
applies here. For a long time, the UK built up
its domestic pool of capital and the financial hub
by attracting wealthy people that weren't overly
loyal to their home country. Now that those people
aren't showing loyalty to them, they are pulling a
shocked Pikachu. But the real question is, does it
even matter? If these people really weren't paying
their fair share of taxes in the first place,
what harm is there in them leaving? If anything,
they will vacate houses which could add much
needed supply to the real estate market. Right?
Wrong. For starters, the houses they are selling
are not exactly ready to be picked up by promising
first time home buyers. High-end real estate in
central London has taken a hit with more listings
and lower demand, but these properties are still
worth several million dollars on the low end.
More broadly though, capital flight is hitting the
UK harder than it would ideally like. All of those
industries that depend on moving money around have
less money to move around, and that's hurting one
of the fewer career paths that can still genuinely
let working class people get ahead in the UK. Now,
I know it might be hard to shed a tear for the
British finance bros. But they still put a lot
of that money back into the regular economy. So,
even though it's not a great system, it's become
one of the few lifelines people have left. Now, in
the long term, this could push for a more balanced
economy, but in the short term, it's going to
suck. The UK has become like a shopping mall
filled with nothing but luxury boutiques and tax
accountants. It makes a lot of money while there
are rich people around, but once they leave, it
doesn't have much left to offer. A shopping mall
filled with a wider variety of stores is going to
be a lot better for a lot of people in the long
term, but nobody really wants to commit to the
rebuilding process. Wealthy people leaving the
UK might not have paid their fair share, but they
still pay a lot through things like value added
taxes and just providing liquidity. Redirecting
the UK away from just financial services means
that political opposition can just point to these
people leaving as a sign of a country in decline
and highlight all of the jobs that housekeepers
are losing. It would be a long, slow, and
politically challenging task even when the rest of
the economy was strong. But the government now has
a lot of debt, high borrowing costs, and timid
political support, which are all going to make
doing what needs to be done much, much harder. A
lot of the surface level issues that get the most
attention can be traced back to not wanting
to upset these people. Chronic underfunding
of services, a reliance on immigration to fill
skill shortages, and rising cost of living are
made worse by not reinvesting or regulating in the
right areas. There are hours of detail about how
exactly this is played out, but that's what Gary's
economics is for. The point is, if you don't want
to end up like the UK, just remember trying
to be the lowest bidder for the global elite
in their money is quite literally a race to the
bottom. If you are from the UK, don't worry. It
could be worse. You could be from California.
Wait, faaa.. Go and watch this video next to
find out how Australia made all of these same
mistakes and yet somehow hasn't had to face any
consequences for it yet. And don't forget to like
and subscribe to keep on learning how money works.